posts/2025-08-14 Svelte Debounced Input.mdx, before:

---
slug: "svelte-debounced-input"
title: "Notes on Debouncing Inputs in Svelte 5"
date: "2025-08-14 07:15"
publish: true
tags: ["svelte", "ux", "typescript", "input"]
description: "A practical debounced input component with TypeScript and Svelte 5"
---

import SearchExample from '../_web/src/components/2025-08-14/SearchExample.svelte'

When designing a user interface, I usually want the UI to update as fast as
possible. However, there are some cases where adding a little delay can _improve_ the experience. A great example of this is reacting to updates as the user types into a text input: instead of reacting on every keypress, it can be better to _debounce_ the input.

## What is Debouncing?

The [MDN Glossary for `Debounce`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Debounce) is a great place to start.

Debouncing is a way to reduce the number of times an event is emitted.

The key idea is that when you have a stream of rapidly firing events (such as keys being pressed while typing), instead of reacting to every single event, we wait until a short pause appears in the stream. This pause indicates the user has finished typing, and _now_ we can react to their input.

Think about how humans naturally talk with each other. When someone is mid-sentence, we don't interrupt after each word. Instead, we wait for that brief pause - that moment of silence that tells us they've completed their thought and it's our turn to respond.

## Why Debounce?

A key reason to use debouncing is to reduce UI lag. Processing every single keystroke may make interfaces feel sluggish, especially with CPU-intensive operations such as searching through tens of thousands of items or recalculating a report table.

Debouncing isn't always necessary: if the app can update quickly (i.e. within 16ms), then debouncing is unlikely to make much difference.

Another key reason is to reduce network traffic. Instead of making dozens of API requests with partial form data, we send a single request with the actual user query. This reduces network congestion and server load.

When we wait for the user to pause, we're acting on what they actually meant to type, not the half-formed thoughts along the way.

## Debouncing Inputs

When debouncing an `<input />` element, there are a few extra nice-to-have features that can make it feel more responsive:

- If the user blurs the input, immediately trigger an update (i.e. they have tabbed out of it).
- If the user presses enter, immediately trigger an update (i.e. they want to submit their search query).
- Don't trigger in the middle of IME composition. I didn't know about this until recently, but composing complex characters (common in Japanese and Chinese) can take multiple keypresses, and the input shouldn't trigger an update until the composition is finished.

## Example

I've put together a little example UI for searching a list of groceries. You can adjust the debounce delay and get a feel for how it works.


I encourage you to experiment with the different delay durations:

- Having no delay (instant) _feels great - but has the trade-off to make dozens of unnecessary API requests.
- A fast delay triggers a search quickly, but often leads to extra API requests
  for half-finished search queries.
- For me, 300ms feels like a sweet spot - quick enough that the UI feels
  reactive, but long enough for me to finish typing my search query.
- Slow adds a noticeable pause between finishing typing and searching - but as
  a user, I can signal that I'm ready to search by pressing Enter.

<SearchExample client:load />

## `<DebouncedInput />`

This DebouncedInput has some useful features:

- Two-way data binding: if you need to programmatically update the input value, you can - for example, clean the value of a search input.
- Resources are cleaned up when the component is unmounted: the `setTimeout` timer is cleared when we no longer need it, to avoid leaking memory.

**How to use this:**

1. Use `<DebouncedInput />` just like a regular `<input />` element.
2. Bind the `value` prop to a `$state()` variable
3. (optional) Set a custom value for `delayMs` (defaults to 250ms)

Open this example [in the Svelte Playground](https://svelte.dev/playground/a1cb52c4018b4622ae8015e7b17f837e?version=latest).

```svelte
<script>
import DebouncedInput from "./DebouncedInput.svelte"

let value = $state('')
</script>

<DebouncedInput
  bind:value
  delayMs={300}
  type="text"
  placeholder="value"
/>

<pre><code>value = "{value}"</code></pre>
```

## Source Code

Here is the full source code for `DebouncedInput.svelte` (MIT Licensed).

I am intentionally not publishing it as a library - if you would like to use it, please copy/paste it.

```svelte
<script lang="ts">
import { onDestroy, untrack } from "svelte";
import type { HTMLInputAttributes } from "svelte/elements";

type Props = HTMLInputAttributes & {
  // Debounce delay in milliseconds
  delayMs?: number;
};

let { delayMs = 250, value = $bindable(), ...restProps }: Props = $props();

if (delayMs < 0) {
  throw new Error("DebouncedInput: delayMs must be >= 0");
}

let inputValue = $state<Props["value"]>(value);
let timer = $state<ReturnType<typeof setTimeout> | undefined>(undefined);
let isComposing = $state(false);

const schedule = () => {
  if (isComposing) {
    return;
  }
  if (timer) {
    clearTimeout(timer);
  }
  timer = setTimeout(flush, delayMs);
};

const flush = () => {
  if (timer) {
    clearTimeout(timer);
    timer = undefined;
  }
  value = inputValue;
};

const handleInput = () => {
  schedule();
};

const handleKeydown = (event: KeyboardEvent) => {
  if (event.key === "Enter") {
    flush();
  }
};

const handleBlur = () => {
  flush();
};

const handleCompositionStart = () => {
  isComposing = true;
};

const handleCompositionEnd = () => {
  isComposing = false;
};

// If the parent manually updates the value, we need to update the input value
$effect(() => {
  if (value !== untrack(() => inputValue)) {
    inputValue = value;
  }
});

onDestroy(() => {
  if (timer) {
    clearTimeout(timer);
  }
});
</script>

<input
  bind:value={inputValue}
  oninput={handleInput}
  onkeydown={handleKeydown}
  onblur={handleBlur}
  oncompositionstart={handleCompositionStart}
  oncompositionend={handleCompositionEnd}
  {...restProps}
/>

<!--
Copyright © 2025 George Czabania

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of
this software and associated documentation files (the “Software”), to deal in
the Software without restriction, including, without limitation, the rights to
use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies
of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do
so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS IS”, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
-->
```

Commit message:

fix: clarify input update behavior during composition events ✏️
This commit provides a clearer explanation about when to trigger updates for the debounced input, particularly regarding composition events in languages that require multiple keypresses. The rationale for this change is to ensure a better understanding for users, especially those working with various languages.

- Updated the explanation about not triggering updates during IME composition to reference "Composition Events" for clarity.
- Explained the significance of waiting until the composition is finished, mentioning multilingual character input.

posts/2025-08-14 Svelte Debounced Input.mdx, after:

---
slug: "svelte-debounced-input"
title: "Notes on Debouncing Inputs in Svelte 5"
date: "2025-08-14 07:15"
publish: true
tags: ["svelte", "ux", "typescript", "input"]
description: "A practical debounced input component with TypeScript and Svelte 5"
---

import SearchExample from '../_web/src/components/2025-08-14/SearchExample.svelte'

When designing a user interface, I usually want the UI to update as fast as
possible. However, there are some cases where adding a little delay can _improve_ the experience. A great example of this is reacting to updates as the user types into a text input: instead of reacting on every keypress, it can be better to _debounce_ the input.

## What is Debouncing?

The [MDN Glossary for `Debounce`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Debounce) is a great place to start.

Debouncing is a way to reduce the number of times an event is emitted.

The key idea is that when you have a stream of rapidly firing events (such as keys being pressed while typing), instead of reacting to every single event, we wait until a short pause appears in the stream. This pause indicates the user has finished typing, and _now_ we can react to their input.

Think about how humans naturally talk with each other. When someone is mid-sentence, we don't interrupt after each word. Instead, we wait for that brief pause - that moment of silence that tells us they've completed their thought and it's our turn to respond.

## Why Debounce?

A key reason to use debouncing is to reduce UI lag. Processing every single keystroke may make interfaces feel sluggish, especially with CPU-intensive operations such as searching through tens of thousands of items or recalculating a report table.

Debouncing isn't always necessary: if the app can update quickly (i.e. within 16ms), then debouncing is unlikely to make much difference.

Another key reason is to reduce network traffic. Instead of making dozens of API requests with partial form data, we send a single request with the actual user query. This reduces network congestion and server load.

When we wait for the user to pause, we're acting on what they actually meant to type, not the half-formed thoughts along the way.

## Debouncing Inputs

When debouncing an `<input />` element, there are a few extra nice-to-have features that can make it feel more responsive:

- If the user blurs the input, immediately trigger an update (i.e. they have tabbed out of it).
- If the user presses enter, immediately trigger an update (i.e. they want to submit their search query).
- Don't trigger in the middle of a ["Composition Event"](https://www.w3.org/TR/uievents/#events-compositionevents). I learned about these events while researching this article: some characters require multiple letters to type (such as adding accents to characters, or building logograms in many Asian languages). The input shouldn't trigger an update until the user has finished composition.

## Example

I've put together a little example UI for searching a list of groceries. You can adjust the debounce delay and get a feel for how it works.


I encourage you to experiment with the different delay durations:

- Having no delay (instant) _feels great - but has the trade-off to make dozens of unnecessary API requests.
- A fast delay triggers a search quickly, but often leads to extra API requests
  for half-finished search queries.
- For me, 300ms feels like a sweet spot - quick enough that the UI feels
  reactive, but long enough for me to finish typing my search query.
- Slow adds a noticeable pause between finishing typing and searching - but as
  a user, I can signal that I'm ready to search by pressing Enter.

<SearchExample client:load />

## `<DebouncedInput />`

This DebouncedInput has some useful features:

- Two-way data binding: if you need to programmatically update the input value, you can - for example, clean the value of a search input.
- Resources are cleaned up when the component is unmounted: the `setTimeout` timer is cleared when we no longer need it, to avoid leaking memory.

**How to use this:**

1. Use `<DebouncedInput />` just like a regular `<input />` element.
2. Bind the `value` prop to a `$state()` variable
3. (optional) Set a custom value for `delayMs` (defaults to 250ms)

Open this example [in the Svelte Playground](https://svelte.dev/playground/a1cb52c4018b4622ae8015e7b17f837e?version=latest).

```svelte
<script>
import DebouncedInput from "./DebouncedInput.svelte"

let value = $state('')
</script>

<DebouncedInput
  bind:value
  delayMs={300}
  type="text"
  placeholder="value"
/>

<pre><code>value = "{value}"</code></pre>
```

## Source Code

Here is the full source code for `DebouncedInput.svelte` (MIT Licensed).

I am intentionally not publishing it as a library - if you would like to use it, please copy/paste it.

```svelte
<script lang="ts">
import { onDestroy, untrack } from "svelte";
import type { HTMLInputAttributes } from "svelte/elements";

type Props = HTMLInputAttributes & {
  // Debounce delay in milliseconds
  delayMs?: number;
};

let { delayMs = 250, value = $bindable(), ...restProps }: Props = $props();

if (delayMs < 0) {
  throw new Error("DebouncedInput: delayMs must be >= 0");
}

let inputValue = $state<Props["value"]>(value);
let timer = $state<ReturnType<typeof setTimeout> | undefined>(undefined);
let isComposing = $state(false);

const schedule = () => {
  if (isComposing) {
    return;
  }
  if (timer) {
    clearTimeout(timer);
  }
  timer = setTimeout(flush, delayMs);
};

const flush = () => {
  if (timer) {
    clearTimeout(timer);
    timer = undefined;
  }
  value = inputValue;
};

const handleInput = () => {
  schedule();
};

const handleKeydown = (event: KeyboardEvent) => {
  if (event.key === "Enter") {
    flush();
  }
};

const handleBlur = () => {
  flush();
};

const handleCompositionStart = () => {
  isComposing = true;
};

const handleCompositionEnd = () => {
  isComposing = false;
};

// If the parent manually updates the value, we need to update the input value
$effect(() => {
  if (value !== untrack(() => inputValue)) {
    inputValue = value;
  }
});

onDestroy(() => {
  if (timer) {
    clearTimeout(timer);
  }
});
</script>

<input
  bind:value={inputValue}
  oninput={handleInput}
  onkeydown={handleKeydown}
  onblur={handleBlur}
  oncompositionstart={handleCompositionStart}
  oncompositionend={handleCompositionEnd}
  {...restProps}
/>

<!--
Copyright © 2025 George Czabania

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of
this software and associated documentation files (the “Software”), to deal in
the Software without restriction, including, without limitation, the rights to
use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies
of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do
so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS IS”, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
-->
```
