posts/2025-07-30 Trouble with Promises.md, before:

---
slug: "your-promises-are-still-running"
title: "Your Promises Are Still Running (Even After You've Moved On)"
date: "2025-07-30 20:10"
publish: true
tags: ["javascript", "typescript", "async", "structured concurrency"]
description: "Exploring the hidden pitfalls of JavaScript Promises: why uncancelled promises can quietly keep running, how it can lead to subtle bugs, and what we can do about it."
---

Today I've been playing around with the [Effection](https://frontside.com/effection/) library. Effection is all about this fun programming concept of "Structured Concurrency". It sounds complicated - and it does take a bit to wrap your head around - but the core idea is pretty simple. 

I'll write more about Structured Concurrency and Effection in the future, but today I want to focus on the problems it's trying to solve. Particularly, the problems around working with Promises.

Let's start with a standard async function which does an HTTP request (using a [Star Wars API](https://swapi.info)).

```typescript
type Person = {
  name: string
}

async function fetchPerson (id: number): Promise<Person> {
  const response = await fetch(`https://swapi.info/api/people/${id}`)
  const person = await response.json() as Person
  return person
}

const person = await fetchPerson(1)
console.log(person.name) // Luke Skywalker
```

This is fine. But what if we want to fetch many people?
For a short list, using `Promise.all` would be enough:

```typescript
const personList = await Promise.all([
  fetchPerson(1),
  fetchPerson(2),
  fetchPerson(3)
])
for (const person of personList) {
  console.log(person.name) // Luke Skywalker, C-3PO, R2-D2
}
```

And this should work - but what happens if one of those requests fails?
Well, `Promise.all` will immediately reject, passing out the error.

Let's fetch some people, but also include a failed promise:

```typescript
async function fail () {
  throw new Error('Fail!')
}

try {
  await Promise.all([
    fetchPerson(1),
    fetchPerson(2),
    fetchPerson(3),
    fail()
  ])
} catch (error) {
  console.error(error) // Fail!
}
```

**Question: What happens to the `fetch` requests to the Star Wars API?**

Well, they keep on going! And it's not intuitive at all. 
Let's hack `fetch` so we can see which requests we have in progress.

```typescript
const fetchInProgress = new Set<string>()

async function fetch (url: string, init?: RequestInit): Promise<Response> {
  fetchInProgress.add(url)
  try {
    const response = await global.fetch(url, init)
    return response
  } finally {
    fetchInProgress.delete(url)
  }
}
```

Now, we can log the `fetchInProgress` set to see which requests are currently in flight.

When we try it with 3 regular requests, we see an empty set -- as all the requests have been completed:

```typescript
await Promise.all([
  fetchPerson(1),
  fetchPerson(2),
  fetchPerson(3),
])

setImmediate(() =>
  console.log(fetchInProgress)) // Set (0) {}
```

But when we include our `Fail!`, the requests are left in progress!

```typescript
try {
  await Promise.all([
    fetchPerson(1),
    fetchPerson(2),
    fetchPerson(3),
    fail(), // [!code highlight]
  ])
} catch (error) {
  console.log(error)
}

setImmediate(() =>
  console.log(fetchInProgress))

// Set (3) {
//   'https://swapi.info/api/people/1',
//   'https://swapi.info/api/people/2',
//   'https://swapi.info/api/people/3'
// }
```

So that's an issue! We've got these other branches of the code running in the background, and we no longer have a way to reason about them!


```
fetchPerson(1) | =======[continues running]=======>
fetchPerson(2) | ============[continues running]=========>
fetchPerson(3) | ================[continues running]==========>
fail()         | ===✗
                    ↑ 
                    Promise.all rejects here
                    but other promises keep going
```

We need a way to tell those `fetchPerson` functions to stop what they are doing.

## Why does this matter?

These orphaned promises aren't just a theoretical concern. In real applications, they can:
- **Waste resources**: Each pending request holds memory and potentially a connection slot
- **Cause race conditions**: Background requests might complete later and update state unexpectedly  
- **Make debugging harder**: Errors from abandoned promises appear in logs long after the code moved on
- **Lead to memory leaks**: If these promises hold references to large objects or callbacks

## Breaking Promises

So we need a way to tell those `fetchPerson` functions to stop what they are doing. JavaScript has a built-in solution for this: [AbortSignal](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/AbortSignal).

Let's write a new version of our `fetchPerson` function that lets us pass a signal to the `fetch` call.

```typescript
async function fetchPerson (id: number, signal?: AbortSignal): Promise<Person> {
  const response = await fetch(`https://swapi.info/api/people/${id}`, { signal })
  const person = await response.json() as Person
  return person
}
```

Now, when we fetch people, we can pass in an AbortSignal.
When we hit an error, we can send an `abort()` message, which will ensure all our fetch requests are cancelled and we have no more background threads. 

```typescript
const abortController = new AbortController() // [!code highlight]
try {
  await Promise.all([
    fetchPerson(1, abortController.signal),
    fetchPerson(2, abortController.signal),
    fetchPerson(3, abortController.signal),
    fail(),
  ])
} catch (error) {
  // alert all promises that they should stop now // [!code highlight]
  abortController.abort() // [!code highlight]
  console.log(error) // Error: Fail!
}

setImmediate(() =>
  console.log(fetchInProgress)) // Set (0) {}
```

## Structured Concurrency

This manual cleanup with AbortSignals works, but it's error-prone. What if we forget to abort? What if we have nested Promise.all calls?

This is where structured concurrency shines. Libraries like Effection ensure that when a parent task fails, all its children are automatically cancelled. No manual cleanup needed.

I'm still learning how to use Effection. This series of blog posts is also a learning experience for myself - as I understand how to use these tools to write better async code.

## Key Takeaways

1. Keeping track of which promises are running in the background isn't obvious by just reading the code. You need runtime logging to understand which parts of your program are currently executing.
2. It is very easy to accidentally leave promises to run in the background. This can lead to all sorts of issues (extra resource usage, deadlocks, general confusion).
3. It's possible to fix this by manually passing around AbortSignals and making sure to catch errors and send `abort()` signals - but it makes the code more complicated and isn't always as easy as with `fetch`.

Commit message:

chore: update dependencies and improve configuration 🧹
This commit updates various dependencies and streamlines the Astro configuration for better performance and simplicity. It also removes unnecessary code, adds new functionality for expressive code integration, and ensures a cleaner layout.

- Updated Astro dependencies in `package.json` to their latest versions for better stability and features.
- Integrated `astro-expressive-code` for enhanced code display capabilities in our Astro site.
- Refined the Astro config file by removing unused transformers, thus simplifying the code structure while maintaining functionality.
- Created a new configuration file `ec.config.mjs` for the expressive code plugin.
- Cleaned up styles in `BlogPost.astro`, `Layout.astro`, and `NotePost.astro` to improve maintainability and readability.
- Updated routing in `archive.astro` to better reflect post URLs.
- Improved descriptive text and formatting in Markdown files, enhancing the clarity of blog posts. 

These changes are aimed at improving site performance and maintainability while enhancing the developer experience.

posts/2025-07-30 Trouble with Promises.md, after:

---
slug: "the-trouble-with-promises"
title: "The Trouble With Promises"
date: "2025-07-30 20:10"
publish: true
tags: ["javascript", "typescript", "async", "structured concurrency"]
description: "Why your promises may till be running even after you've moved on."
---

Today I've been playing around with the [Effection](https://frontside.com/effection/) library. Effection is all about this fun programming concept of "Structured Concurrency". It sounds complicated - and it does take a bit to wrap your head around - but the core idea is pretty simple. 

I'll write more about Structured Concurrency and Effection in the future, but today I want to focus on the problems it's trying to solve. Particularly, the problems around working with Promises.

Let's start with a standard async function which does an HTTP request (using a [Star Wars API](https://swapi.info)).

```typescript
type Person = {
  name: string
}

async function fetchPerson (id: number): Promise<Person> {
  const response = await fetch(`https://swapi.info/api/people/${id}`)
  const person = await response.json() as Person
  return person
}

const person = await fetchPerson(1)
console.log(person.name) // Luke Skywalker
```

This is fine. But what if we want to fetch many people?
For a short list, using `Promise.all` would be enough:

```typescript
const personList = await Promise.all([
  fetchPerson(1),
  fetchPerson(2),
  fetchPerson(3)
])
for (const person of personList) {
  console.log(person.name) // Luke Skywalker, C-3PO, R2-D2
}
```

And this should work - but what happens if one of those requests fails?
Well, `Promise.all` will immediately reject, passing out the error.

Let's fetch some people, but also include a failed promise:

```typescript
async function fail () {
  throw new Error('Fail!')
}

try {
  await Promise.all([
    fetchPerson(1),
    fetchPerson(2),
    fetchPerson(3),
    fail()
  ])
} catch (error) {
  console.error(error) // Fail!
}
```

**Question: What happens to the `fetch` requests to the Star Wars API?**

Well, they keep on going! And it's not intuitive at all. 
Let's hack `fetch` so we can see which requests we have in progress.

```typescript
const fetchInProgress = new Set<string>()

async function fetch (url: string, init?: RequestInit): Promise<Response> {
  fetchInProgress.add(url)
  try {
    const response = await global.fetch(url, init)
    return response
  } finally {
    fetchInProgress.delete(url)
  }
}
```

Now, we can log the `fetchInProgress` set to see which requests are currently in flight.

When we try it with 3 regular requests, we see an empty set -- as all the requests have been completed:

```typescript
await Promise.all([
  fetchPerson(1),
  fetchPerson(2),
  fetchPerson(3),
])

setImmediate(() =>
  console.log(fetchInProgress)) // Set (0) {}
```

But when we include our `Fail!`, the requests are left in progress!

```typescript {6}
try {
  await Promise.all([
    fetchPerson(1),
    fetchPerson(2),
    fetchPerson(3),
    fail(),
  ])
} catch (error) {
  console.log(error)
}

setImmediate(() =>
  console.log(fetchInProgress))

// Set (3) {
//   'https://swapi.info/api/people/1',
//   'https://swapi.info/api/people/2',
//   'https://swapi.info/api/people/3'
// }
```

So that's an issue! We've got these other branches of the code running in the background, and we no longer have a way to reason about them!


```
fetchPerson(1) | =======[continues running]=======>
fetchPerson(2) | ============[continues running]=========>
fetchPerson(3) | ================[continues running]==========>
fail()         | ===✗
                    ↑ 
                    Promise.all rejects here
                    but other promises keep going
```

We need a way to tell those `fetchPerson` functions to stop what they are doing.

## Why does this matter?

These orphaned promises aren't just a theoretical concern. In real applications, they can:
- **Waste resources**: Each pending request holds memory and potentially a connection slot
- **Cause race conditions**: Background requests might complete later and update state unexpectedly  
- **Make debugging harder**: Errors from abandoned promises appear in logs long after the code moved on
- **Lead to memory leaks**: If these promises hold references to large objects or callbacks

## Breaking Promises

So we need a way to tell those `fetchPerson` functions to stop what they are doing. JavaScript has a built-in solution for this: [AbortSignal](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/AbortSignal).

Let's write a new version of our `fetchPerson` function that lets us pass a signal to the `fetch` call.

```typescript
async function fetchPerson (id: number, signal?: AbortSignal): Promise<Person> {
  const response = await fetch(`https://swapi.info/api/people/${id}`, { signal })
  const person = await response.json() as Person
  return person
}
```

Now, when we fetch people, we can pass in an AbortSignal.
When we hit an error, we can send an `abort()` message, which will ensure all our fetch requests are cancelled and we have no more background threads. 

```typescript {1, 10-11}
const abortController = new AbortController()
try {
  await Promise.all([
    fetchPerson(1, abortController.signal),
    fetchPerson(2, abortController.signal),
    fetchPerson(3, abortController.signal),
    fail(),
  ])
} catch (error) {
  // alert all promises that they should stop now
  abortController.abort()
  console.log(error) // Error: Fail!
}

setImmediate(() =>
  console.log(fetchInProgress)) // Set (0) {}
```

## Structured Concurrency

This manual cleanup with AbortSignals works, but it's error-prone. What if we forget to abort? What if we have nested Promise.all calls?

This is where structured concurrency shines. Libraries like Effection ensure that when a parent task fails, all its children are automatically cancelled. No manual cleanup needed.

I'm still learning how to use Effection. This series of blog posts is also a learning experience for myself - as I understand how to use these tools to write better async code.

## Key Takeaways

1. Keeping track of which promises are running in the background isn't obvious by just reading the code. You need runtime logging to understand which parts of your program are currently executing.
2. It is very easy to accidentally leave promises to run in the background. This can lead to all sorts of issues (extra resource usage, deadlocks, general confusion).
3. It's possible to fix this by manually passing around AbortSignals and making sure to catch errors and send `abort()` signals - but it makes the code more complicated and isn't always as easy as with `fetch`.
